Nobody can pinpoint coffee’s appearance.
Figuring out when the smell of this brew
began drifting through dusty roads and villages
is a huge undertaking.
We do know that Coffea Arabica plants
are indigenous to Africa,
more specifically to Ethiopia.
Ethiopia’s peoples have known coffee
for over five centuries.
They have tried it in all its forms
and this has led to the beverage
we know and enjoy today.
Coffee’s first appearance
is surrounded by lore and legend.
Most sources mention the legend
of Kaldi the shepherd,
set in Ethiopia in 400 BC.
The boy noticed that his goats
were all excited after eating some wild berries.
He tried some too and immediately
he felt his strength surge.
Drawn by young Kaldi’s liveliness,
a passing monk tried the red berries too.
He, too, suddenly felt empowered
over all his senses
and was so perceptive he couldn’t sleep.
He was so focussed that he was able
to pray until sunset.
So the monk passed the secret of coffee
on to his brothers
and soon to all the monks in Ethiopia.
Legend or not, with time coffee became
the official drink in Islamic countries.
For centuries, coffee was used
as food and not as a drink.
Coffee beans were eaten
either whole or ground
and mixed with ghee (clarified butter).
This unique ritual was accompanied
by prayer and meditation
and still takes place in the far-off areas
of Kaffa and Sidamo.
In the late 19th century,
thanks to the trade routes established
between the West and the Arab civilisations,
the use of toasted coffee beans became popular
among non-Islamic communities as well,
especially after the Ethiopian Orthodox Church,
which believed brew o be dangerous and immoral,
lifted its ban.
In the villages of Ethiopia the women see
to the various stages of coffee-making.
They skilfully dry the berries,
crush the skin in a mortar
and sieve the coffee.
The toasted and crushed beans
are then used to make the precious brew
for the entire community.
When we think of Ethiopia
we often imagine a poor land
made mostly of desert,
plagued by hunger and war.
We often forget that this country
has a long and rich history and culture,
among East Africa’s most fascinating.
It is a stunning mosaic
of races and ethnicities
brought together
by their great passion for coffee.